When you look at the polls, American
voters do not find deficits to be that
problematic. When you look at the issues
they're current concerned about, it's
not a top issue. So, until that changes
and becomes a top issue for voters, it
likely won't become a top issue for
politicians.
[Music]
Hi everyone, I'm Gjen Banerjee and I'm
Telus Deeos and this is WSJ's Take on
the Week, the weekly show where we give
you a leg up on the worlds of money and
investing. Last month, Telus and I were
at the Wall Street Journal's Future of
Everything Conference, and we got some
questions about tax policy. Here's one
of them. Hi, this is Kevin McFersonen,
uh, Rochester, New York. Um, I guess my
my question twofold. Um, one in terms of
short-term when I listen to all of the
discussion about tariffs, one of the
things that somewhat surprises me is
that it doesn't then relate to tax
policy. Um so if I think about tariffs
then in some ways they are the opposite
of the tax rebate um you know tax
incentives etc that we have in the
economy. Uh do you see the tariffs
changing that that tax policy at all? We
had some of the same questions. So we
called in Mike Mlan, public policy
senior analyst at Barclays. Michael,
thank you so much for joining us here
today. I'm excited for this chat. Thanks
for having me. I'm excited to be here.
Tell us, it seems like the number one
thing on a lot of investors minds right
now is the deficits and this big
beautiful bill in Washington right now.
Yeah. I mean, I think when it comes to
conversations about like the treasuries
market, which has been a big focus for
for for us at the journal and and and
for investors obviously. Yeah. It's
questions of of government deficits, you
know, and and what impact the budget
bill will have. Um, but I want to ask
you, Michael, from a from a Washington
and sort of policy point of view, how
much of the the Wall Street conversation
that we have about the budget, how much
is that actually like influencing
day-to-day the policy discussion that
they're having in Washington? Right. So,
I look, I think the primary purpose of
this bill um, and the politics around it
is to extend the expiring provisions of
the 2017 Trump tax cuts, the TCJA.
Certainly, I get the sense that there is
more discussion in Washington today
about deficits and debt than there was
in 2017 when Congress enacted the law to
begin with. Um, but I do think from what
I hear from clients, there's much more
focus in the markets about the long-term
sustainability of the fiscal trajectory
that we're on than um than politicians
are talking about in DC. So, Wall Street
is really concerned. Maybe Washington
isn't as concerned. I would say less
concerned. I mean, there are certainly
pockets of lawmakers. We saw this as the
bill was moving through the House with
some members of the Freedom Caucus um
who were having concerns about uh how
much uh the bill would add to deficits
over the next 10 years. But then we also
saw in Washington that there was an
equally vocal group on the other side
who were concerned that the bill was
cutting too much for some um programs
like like Medicare, Medicaid. So, uh I
think it's still kind of a mixed uh view
in DC on on deficits. How big is the
deficit that we're talking about? I've
seen a few different estimates thrown
out there. What what number are you
watching right now? Right. So, the House
passed bill as as estimated by the
Congressional Budget Office, they're the
official congressional scorekeeper,
would add 2.4 trillion to deficits over
10 years. Uh, and that's based on
current law baseline. So, under current
law, the, you know, a lot of the tax
cuts are expiring at the end of this
year. So, extending them would add to
deficits. What I hear often from clients
is um they look through actually the CBO
number and what they look at is what the
number would be if everything in the
bill was made permanent because there's
a lot of new tax cuts, no tax on tips,
no tax on overtime, um a new deduction
for social security, uh that are just
temporary. So markets look at it as what
would this mean for the deficits if
everything was permanent. And there
you're looking at a number about 4
trillion and that's before added
interest expense. So then when you add
in interest expense, you're looking at a
number potentially as high as 5 trillion
added to deficits over 10 years. And
historically, have we seen this level of
spending when the US isn't in a
recession? We have not seen uh this
level of deficits if we're not in a
recession or other type of um time where
you would expect the government would be
spending more war, you know, recession.
Um, and this Treasury Secretary has said
it's his goal over time to move the
ratio of of deficit to GDP from 6%
closer to 3%. But I think when you look
at this bill uh, over the next 10 years,
you see a trajectory where we're likely
going to be in a world of two trillion
plus annual deficits as far as the eye
can see, which means we're going to be
at that 6 to 7% um, of deficits to GDP
ratio going forward. So we are in
uncharted territory in some ways. we
are, you know, what's really driving the
deficits are are are two things. Um,
entitlement spending and interest on the
debt. So, define entitlements for us
again. I know we talk we throw that word
around a lot, but what exactly does that
refer to? It's the big three. It's um
Medicare, Medicaid, and and Social
Security. Then there are some other
entitlement programs, but those are the
those are the big three. So when you
look at revenue coming into the
government um it's about 17% of GDP and
that's where it's been historically when
you look back you know over the decades
and actually when you look at
discretionary spending so that's the
non-entitlement spending the spending
that funds the appropriations for the
government every year um that's around
6% 6.3% and it's you know about where it
was last year as it was pre pandemic in
2019. So the two things that are driving
it is this growth in entitlement
spending as the population is getting
older um and then increase in the
interest expense as interest rates have
have moved up. That explains why
President Trump seems to want lower
interest rates, right? That could save
the US a lot of money in terms of in
terms of our interest expense, right? So
if interest rates came down, the
government could benefit from that uh in
terms of lower interest expense. Um, you
know, the joke in Washington is actually
when you look at the federal budget, the
government is really an insurance
company with a military. Um, because
that's how we spend our money, right?
Um, so much of it is for the entitlement
programs and many of those entitlement
programs are health related. Um, and
then you have interest on the debt and
then the third big expense of course is
is defense. How much of this comes down
to views about the economic impact of
the budget? Is there a debate that maybe
this budget and the reason maybe that
we're more concerned about it is that
it's not going to have the same kind of
economic bump given that we are
extending existing tax cuts rather than
adding new tax cuts. I just want to know
how much of the conversation is really
about economic growth. Right? So, if
we're going to try and get this um 6%
deficit to GDP ratio down, there's two
ways you can do that, right? You can
reduce the numerator by shrinking
deficits or you can grow the denominator
by by growing the economy. Uh, and I
think right now there is a wide range of
views in Washington about what this bill
may do for economic growth. So if you
look at the estimates from the White
House Council of Economic Advisors,
they're very bullish on what the bill
may mean for growth. You know, they they
say that it could add three, four, five
percentage points to real GDP growth um
over the decade. You know, when you look
at the CBO number, it is uh much more
conservative, right? they're they're
looking at, you know, marginal increase
to growth maybe, you know, 40 basis
points um over 10 years. Our economists
have taken a look at it and and their
estimates are a bit closer to CBO's
estimates. You know, they're looking
say, well, maybe it could add 20 to 30
basis points of real GDP growth next
year. So, um and and you know, I don't
think we should necessarily be surprised
if the bill did not add a lot to growth.
uh because the real objective of the
bill is to extend current tax policy.
There are not really that many new tax
cuts uh in this bill and there's also a
lot of uh spending cuts in in the bill
as well. So I think that's in part what
drives um maybe a little bit of u the
uncertainty or the range of views around
growth. I think that one reason that
people are so keyed in on this budget is
obviously there's a lot happening, a lot
of changes taking place in government,
but I also think that it's the it's what
happened in the UK a couple of years ago
when they had the so-called Liz trust
moment where, you know, the prime
minister proposed a budget that had a
lot of tax cuts, didn't necessarily
raise a lot more revenue, you know,
would have involved issuing a lot more,
you know, UK debt, a lot more uh guilts,
and the market really freaked out.
Obviously, we've seen Treasury yields
rise in the US. We've had a few kind of
scary moments, couple of auctions that
that spooked people out. I don't know if
we've had that Liz Trust moment here in
the US so far. Do you think that's still
a possibility, Mike, or have we kind of
already absorbed the the headlines and
and maybe, you know, are going to move
on basically from here? I hear that
question a lot from clients. Um, I think
the US is different from the UK in a
number of ways. um and why that may mean
that we don't get that same Liz trust
moment here at least in the near term.
The one reason I think predominantly is
that the dollar is the global reserve
currency. So as long as the US
government can run deficits because
they're able to issue bonds and there's
investor appetite to purchase those
bonds, we can continue to run deficits.
The issue in the UK, of course, was that
investors did start to rebel and say,
you know, you're going to have to
compensate us at a much higher yield if
we're going to be purchasing this debt.
Uh, and that just doesn't seem to have
played out yet in the US. You know,
right after the election, there was an
increase in yields on longerterm um
treasuries. Uh, as the market, I think,
began to already price in even back in
November, an extension of the 2017 tax
cuts. Um, but we haven't seen kind of
that same magnitude that we saw during
the, you know, the Liz Trust moment when
the government in the UK had to kind of
then revise its it its budget. And when,
you know, you listen to Secretary Bess
Bessent, he'll often point out that the
10-year yield right now is lower than it
was on January 20th when the president
took office. So, you mentioned clients
ask you about this Liz Trust moment. How
concerned are clients about these
deficits and the big beautiful bill?
Like, what's the vibe out there in terms
of what you're hearing? I think
investors are a bit confused um because
I think they went into the start of this
year with the new administration and
whether it was all the conversations
around Doge and cutting government
spending, the secretary's comments
around uh moving to, you know, 3%
deficit to GDP ratio, and then they look
at the reconciliation bill and there's a
bit of um h how does this all line up
when we have a bill that's potentially
adding um to deficits uh over the next
10 years. You know, the one thing that I
think clients and investors are still uh
maybe the juryy's still out on is tariff
revenue. Uh because that that could be
significant, right? And you hear that
often now from the White House saying
like, "Well, CBO scores the bill one
way, but they don't account for the
substantial tariff revenue that's coming
in." They did a separate analysis of the
president's tariffs and found that that
could raise, I think, 2.7 trillion in
revenue over 10 years. So that could be
a big offset to um the one big beautiful
bill. And I think clients are just
uncertain about as we all are how long
those tariffs are going to be in effect
for what form they're ultimately going
to settle on. And and that all will be
important to understanding how much
revenue they can generate. Treasury
yields have been crazy volatile, but
they haven't moved that much since the
start of the year. Investors always say
that they're worried about deficits, but
that's not reflected in the market. Why
is that?
I'm always shocked um and maybe I
shouldn't be at this point, but
investors are so forwardthinking that
much of this bill was priced into asset
prices going back to President Trump's
election in November. There was an
expectation that we were going to get a
reconciliation bill. We were going to
get an extension of the tax cuts. And
so, in some ways, the market story for
this bill is already behind us. But
people have been worried about deficits
for years, if not decades. Like, when
does this actually start to become a
concern if it does? I think that's a
great question for the bond markets. You
know, at what point do the bond markets
decide enough is enough and I don't
think we're there yet. Um, you know, one
date on the calendar to look at and it's
still eight or so years away is uh we
just got recent updates from the
trustees for the entitlement programs
saying that social security um trust
fund is going to go insolvent in the
early 2030s. That will leave Congress
with a decision it has to make, right?
either current retirees benefits will be
cut by approximately a quarter or
Congress needs to figure out some way to
make the fund solvent again, right? And
that could be structural changes to the
program or could mean a big bailout from
the Treasury General Fund, right? But I
think that for deficits longer term,
we're going to need a moment that
confronts Congress for Congress to act
rather than assuming that Congress will
um act uh preventatively to kind of do
something. And the reason for that is
just politics. When you look at the
polls, American voters do not find
deficits to be that problematic. When
you look at the issues they're current
concerned about, it's not a top issue.
So, until that changes and becomes a top
issue for voters, it likely won't become
a top issue for politicians. Well, let's
let's dive into some more like kind of
tax and more like sector specific policy
issues uh after we take a quick break.
With President Biden's inflation
reduction act, I kept hearing from
investors that that act made them more
bullish on electrification
and onshoring. Are there any big themes
here that you think could emerge for
investors from this bill? Yeah, look, I
think the the one uh theme that could
emerge is the administration and
congressional Republicans really want to
incentivize domestic manufacturing. And
so there are a few provisions in the
bill that are put in there to try and do
that, right? uh one is the extension of
uh immediate expensing for domestic R&D.
Um another is um full depreciation for
capital expenses like equipment and and
new factories. And again, these are
things that were in the 2017 tax cuts
and job jobs act. So the these are
extending a current tax policies. That's
right. Tax policies that were enacted in
17. Some of them have already expired
and so they would be bringing them back.
Others are starting to phase out. So,
you know, eliminating the phase out and
making them making them permanent. Um,
but that would be the goal, I think, of
this legislation when you look at the
corporate side because there's no
adjustment to the 21% statutory rate.
So, really what companies have at stake
are are some of these business
provisions uh that I think are really
focused on domestic manufacturing.
Recently there was a big move in in in
um the shares of solar companies because
it seems like you know things are still
in flux but it looks like the direction
of things Mike tell me if this is where
you think they're headed is towards
taking out a lot of the tax credits that
have gone to you know solar and wind and
other kind of renewable energy. So there
is I think a big interest in the impact
on and part of the breakup of of well I
I don't know what their relationship
status now is. complicated of Elon Musk
and Donald Trump was about, you know, EV
tax credits, right? Obviously, that's
been good for Tesla. So, what's what's
the future for EVs, you know, clean
tech, etc. under this kind of new under
the one big beautiful budget? Yeah. You
know, in the spring of last year, we
published a note taking a look at what
could happen to the IRA depending on the
outcome of the election last year. I
think what always made the IRA
vulnerable if we had Republican unified
government was the fact that it was
passed through reconciliation with only
democratic votes, right? And you can
contrast that to something like the
CHIPS act that was passed with
bipartisan support and so therefore is
much more politically durable when you
have electoral change. So the IRA was, I
think, always going to be um something
that would get changed if Republicans
had the opportunity. So investors never
really put all their eggs in that basket
thinking, okay, I think some of them
did. I definitely heard from investors
who were moving their money around based
on the IRA. Yeah. So I I think what I
hear from clients today is that the
changes proposed to the IRA in this
bill, you know, may have a short-term
impact uh in terms of demand for, you
know, investment in some of these
renewable technologies if we lose some
of these credits. But longer term, I
think investors still remain quite
bullish that aggregate electricity
demand is going to grow so much that
we're going to need to increase supply
from all sources of energy, including
renewables. And so regardless of what
happens with the IRA, when you look at
the long term, there's going to be kind
of this structural demand for increasing
investment in renewables. There are a
couple things that are also seem to be
going down to the wire in terms of
negotiations. One is, you know,
Medicaid. It seems like the Senate and
the House, there's a lot of daylight on
it. Seems like senators are much more
concerned about big cuts to Medicaid. Um
there are a couple that have really kind
of stood on that. And then the other is,
and this is of course of great interest
to those of us here in New York State,
is the salt deduction, the ability to
deduct your state and local taxes from
your federal taxes. Tell us a little bit
about the politics of those things.
Maybe they're even related. I'm not
sure. Uh it just seems like those are
like kind of the the the the big couple
of of debating points that may still get
kind of reshaped as this thing moves
towards its final form. Yeah. What what
makes this bill challenging politically
is the very narrow margins that
Republicans have in the House and
Senate. So they have a three seat
majority in in the House and a three-
seat majority in in the Senate. And
because reconciliation by its nature is
a purely partisan exercise, it means
that the entire team has to agree on
everything essentially in order to have
the votes to get it through. Um, salt's
one issue that has divided the House
Republicans because there are a handful
of Republicans who represent states like
New York and New Jersey where the salt
deduction is important. So, there was
this fine-tuned compromise that was
reached in the House to raise that from
10,000 to 40,000. The Senate has taken a
different view on that. And so I think
that's one of those probably points that
will be one of the last remaining
sticking points to be resolved, but it
needs to be resolved because otherwise
there won't be the votes in the House to
get the bill across the finish line. The
Medicaid cuts are are likewise, right?
Again, it you know, you have members on
both sides of that issue. Some that feel
that we're not making enough cuts and
others that feel like we're making too
many cuts, right? And again, that's an
issue that they're still going to have
to hash through um and see what
compromise they can come to. And
obviously that's imp impactful to you
know people who you know either live in
a high tax state or who are you know
rely on Medicaid. But from an investment
or economic point of view would you say
that these are also sort of ultimately
marginal to kind of how the markets or
specific investors or maybe you know
your economists view this budget or are
those like really important to you know
the deficit impact or the macroeconomic
impact or the sort of sector impact of
this? So on salt, it's just a I think an
issue of parochial interest to New
York-based investors. So I get asked a
lot about it just I think it because
people are uh interested about how it
impacts their own taxes. But uh Medicaid
cuts I think uh are more impactful when
you take a look at the macro impact of
the bill, right? So the House bill, you
know, would cut uh spending by 1.6
trillion over 10 years and about 700
billion of that 1.6 trillion comes from
changes to uh Medicaid. So, it's a big
part of the spending cuts that are part
of the bill. And so, any changes to that
potentially moves that aggregate
spending cut number and then that has
implications for how much uh the bill
may add to deficits over the 10 years.
So, I think a lot of this is uh is much
more art than science. We're going to
take one last quick break and then when
we come back, one more question for Mike
Mlan of Barclays.
Welcome back. So, Mike, does the one big
beautiful bill, does it help businesses
more or individuals more? I think it
helps individuals more. Um, so much of
this bill is really focused on
individuals and I think that is in some
ways the biggest difference from 2025 to
2017. 2017 was all about businesses in
terms of tax reform. 2025 is all about
individuals. Well, we've got the early
2030s circled on our calendar. I'm sure
politics will sort itself out and
everyone will rapidly agree on how to
deal with those things when they emerge
then. Uh Mike, it's been a great
conversation. Thank you, Mike. Thank
you.
[Music]
That's the intent that that the
provision would never come into effect
because the US would be successful in
negotiations to get other countries to
level the playing field on taxes. Speak
softly and carry a big tax stick, I
guess.
[Music]